## Take Two

As the team behind *Torn Apart/Separados*, Vol. 1 visualized the carceral geographies of immigrant detention in the United States, we kept circling back to questions we couldn’t quite answer at the time: How many tax dollars does it take to support the shadowy web of ICE infrastructure we were seeing? Whose coffers are swelling with the spoils from the enterprise of detaining migrants? Has the financial landscape changed over time? And to what extent do the numbers of available detention centers and government funds allocated to ICE collectively point to the United States government’s readiness to expand ICE operations at a moment’s notice. 

These questions lie at the heart of *Torn Apart/Separados*, Vol. 2, a deep dive into the financial heart of immigrant detention in the United States. Through new data visualizations created by a team of both original and new participants, we follow the money, untangling the fiscal particularities underlying ICE. These visualizations, based on data from ICE contracts between fiscal years 2014 and 2018 scraped from [USASpending.gov](https://www.usaspending.gov/#/), range from concrete depictions of government contracting to a more granular account of the number of lives torn-apart at points of deportation.

In “Rain,” we depict the explosive growth of ICE contract values over time. “Freezer” documents the range of goods, services, and companies that prop up the immigration enforcement machine. Through “Gain” we expose the most egregious participants in ICE’s operations, from prison services to businesses owned by people of color to well-known companies to universities. Our congressional “Districts” map visualizes the total number of ICE dollars flowing-in, the largest recipients and the representative for that district. “Lines” puts these expenditures in haunting context through its representation of deportations since 2012 by port of removal. Finally, a map of allies builds on the list provided in Volume 1, along with new information, represented geo-spatially. 

Thus, *Torn Apart/Separados*, Vol. 2 offers a searing look at the financial players behind ICE operations. Shedding light on the booming business of immigrant detention, enforcement, and deportation, it highlights the emergence of a robust ICE-industrial complex that grew by 987% from 2014 to 2018 and 78% from 2017 to 2018 alone. This data begs a troubling question: what will 2019 bring? 
 

## Follow the Money, See Where It Goes

“Socks are needed for detainee welfare,” or so reads a description of $11,305 of goods and services provided by MI Click Marketing to ICE in fiscal year 2018. Boys’ jackets for upstate New York winters ($9,528), tampons for detainees at Port Isabel Service Processing Center in Texas ($4999.50), Catholic Mass ($3,502,726.01), boxed lunches to be served on chartered flights carrying out deportation orders ($36,157.44). Amid the 5 Billion dollars awarded to government contractors by ICE in fiscal year 2018 alone, these ordinary expenditures, serve as a stirring reminder of the people behind the numbers in our visualizations. These precarious human lives, trapped in the web of ICE operations, dwell in the purgatory of the Trump administration’s state of exception where, as of our release date, hundreds of immigrant children remain separated from their families. 

Simply unraveling this data took us down the rabbit holes of government contracting, where awards are documented in excruciating detail for “transparency.” The discrepancies between the first chart we created based on the data set and the updated version (Figure 1) illustrate our initial missteps. 

#IMGTAG#

Each award links to a wealth of data, from recipient to parent company to congressional district to bid processes to contract modifications, and more. Our earlier chart demonstrates the challenges of making sense of this data, inaccurately calculating contract modifications in the current and potential contract values. Through our research, however, we recognized that these values were wildly incongruent with ICE budgets and used the learning moment as further impetus to understand the nuances of the data before committing to a set of visualizations. As we worked, we developed a cheat sheet for the columns of data that accompany each award to track their meanings. We then dug more deeply into the categories, wondering what they had to say in conversation with each other.

While the sheer volume of money poured into ICE operations and its startling increase over time is enough of a story, we found other stories hidden in the data. Quantities of goods and services that support detention, enforcement, and deportation are overwhelming. Mundane awards for toilet paper, spray cleaner, and lotion are juxtaposed with carceral technologies: armored vehicles, body armor, and tasers. Such ordinary goods and services that bespeak the banality of evil can be overshadowed by the unfathomable sums spent on titans of the prison industry now in the immigrant detention game: $438,379,354.01 to GEO Group, $120,431,609.32 to MVM, and $151,008,676.20 to CoreCivic (formerly Corrections Corporation of America) in 2018 alone. 

Within the data, we found commonplace companies like Amazon, platforms like RStudio that support digital humanities research, scholarly knowledge cartels like Elsevier, universities like Johns Hopkins, periodicals like *The Economist*, and popular websites like LinkedIn. Good news, Mac users: Apple isn’t in the ICE contract game. But if you have a Dell, well, you may have bigger problems. 

How to effectively convey these stories was itself a matter of debate that reflects the ethical commitments of our team. While Vol. 1’s ethical questions focused on the safety of detained children, here we grappled with a different challenge: how do we visualize financial data for data storytelling without distorting or misrepresenting it. This was, in part, the result of the limitations of representing money through 2-dimensional shapes, where sizes of objects can show relative differences in value but are less reliable for absolute value. But this was also a matter of how we told our stories. 

Designing “Gain” was a crucial moment where these tensions came to the fore. The idea behind this visualization was to feature the most stunning examples of collusion with immigration enforcement through companies and institutions named on the “Wall of Shame”—some for their grotesque profits, some for curious presence in the data set, others for their household names. On the “Wall of Shame,” we had to scale the data so the smallest words were still visible while the largest ones still fit the page. For example, Geo Groups should actually be 72,2843 times as large as UPS (the smallest item on the word cloud) and 3.6 times as large as CCA (the second-largest. However, these sizes weren’t possible to represent without logarithmic scaling, which obscures both the absolute and relative dollar values. 

We also created “Equal Opportunity Oppression” pie charts representing the participation of people of color, women, and women of color in ICE contracts. Working with this data was a puzzle: in accordance with Equal Opportunity laws, the United States government collects data on gender and racial demographics of business owners who receive contracts—as long as they aren’t white or male. Contractors are given the opportunity to identify with racial and ethnic groups, where they can select multiple categories as well as “other minority.” The categories read like a hodgepodge of census designations over the decades, some now abandoned. Contractors are also asked if they wish to identify as women, women-owned-small-business, women-owned-disadvantaged-business, or joint-venture-women-owned-small-business. There are no non-binary gender options. 

While we wanted to reveal the troubling cooperation of people belonging to these categories, we did not want to do so in a mode that was equivalent to the government’s use of this data: demonstrating equal opportunity. Nor did we want our visualization to look like a critique of an absence of diversity in the data set—as though we think there should be *greater* participation of people in protected categories in the machinery of ICE detention. Therefore, when designing the pie charts we consciously avoided any comparisons that would encourage that narrative. Moreover, because this demographic data is opt-in and marked only with “t” for true (indicating belonging to a category) or “f” for false, those kinds of comparisons could be wholly inaccurate—there is simply no way to know whether contractors chose not to respond. We ran into a further challenge: how do we represent intersectional identity? Government data itself is not operationalized to account for intersectionality, so we prototyped several visualization ideas, from a single pie chart to a Euler diagram to multiple pie charts for gender, race and ethnicity, and intersectionality. 

Another critical tension arose over the extent to which we were directly prescribing a course of action through Vol. 2. Some team members favored offering direct ways to engage with ICE’s government contractors. Others were concerned that for sole proprietors or other individuals whose contact information is in the data set, this would be tantamount to doxxing. Ultimately, in the spirit of Vol. 1, we erred on the side of telling stories with data without articulating an agenda for their use. We leave that to our readers, particularly those with experience in organizing. 

In designing Freezer, we wanted to get at the complexity of the data itself. Many companies provide multiple "products and services," while others only provide one. "Murderboard" captures some of this material and financial web. "ICE Tray" attempts to cluster companies in smaller piles to help us begin to understand where the money is going to. The government uses its own categorization system—two in fact—the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) and the Product and Service Code (PSC). We chose to create our own taxonomy focusing on what we want to pay attention to: *Surveillance*, the *Flow of Goods and Bodies*, the *Banality* of administration, the *Threat of Violence*, *Reforming Bodies* through medicine, uniforms, etc, the construction and upkeep of *Walls*, our whirring *Machines*, the *Doctrine* of churches, instruction and advertisement, and one *Mixed Bag* for random contracts.


## The Endgame

> Nancy Pelosi and the Democrats want to abolish the brave men and women of ICE. What I want to do is abolish the killers in ISIS. And you know who is going to win? We are.[^1] 

What was the endgame of ICE, we asked ourselves? In Vol. 1, we saw the vast territory of containment that ICE had linked, built or purchased. The vast majority of our dots on that map, however, were, small round dots, signifying un-use. They had held no ICE detainees. Why was ICE amassing infrastructure that seemed unlinked to the crisis of family detainment on the southern borders? As we began to plan Vol. 2, we began to map out this world. 

An initial line of inquiry was to go through the capacity. ICE has nearly 2000 facilities, the vast majority of which are "currently not in use." However, ICE maintains data on their ADP (Average Daily Population). We wanted to call this collective number, Capacity. ICE wanted to make “[rapid judgments](https://www.motherjones.com/kevin-drum/2018/04/sessions-immigration-judges-should-complete-700-cases-per-year/)” or “civil criminalization” ie. someone can be deported without going before the Judge. We wanted to call this the Churn Rate. Jeff Sessions etc. have [a figure of 12.5 million](https://www.fairus.org/issue/illegal-immigration/how-many-illegal-immigrants-are-in-us) “Illegal Aliens” in the country. This number could be the First Target (T1) for mass deportation. We created Beds as a representation of the ADP. However, we were unable to get this visualization of future-scaling because we could not get to the churn rate. The fingerprints of the architects of this infrastructure are untraceable at the moment. The infrastructure remains banal, in plain view, and dormant. It seems that sections of its policing, detention and deportation arms are being activated in stages. It is lying in wait. 

Another line of inquiry we pursued was examining “denaturalization”: stripping United States citizenship from [naturalized citizens](https://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/immigration/article214173489.html). The process started in earnest in 2014, as part and parcel of a wider project to protect the "[integrity of U.S. Citizenship](https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/usab65&div=32&g_sent=1&casa_token=&collection=journals#)." In 2014, a program first called "Operation Targeting Groups of Inadmissable Subjects" and, later, "Operation Janus" was granted approximately $5 million by Congress to comb through records and link those who may have re-applied for citizenship under a second name. The strategy began to bear fruit early [in 2018](https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-secures-first-denaturalization-result-operation-janus). The 2019 budget includes an ask for a further $207.6 million to fund [Operation Second Look](https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/U.S.%20Immigration%20and%20Customs%20Enforcement.pdf), which would target an estimated 700,000 records [suspected to be de-naturalized](https://www.pri.org/stories/2018-07-10/us-using-expanded-fingerprint-database-review-citizenship-thousands-americans). We went through case-law databases and were able to isolate over 90 cases of denaturalizations, the majority of which were people of South Asian descent. However, we did not know how best to proceed with the visualization without both de-anonymizing the cases and without criminalizing sub-sections of United States communities. 

An additional line of inquiry we considered  was the throttling of paths to citizenship—[especially birthright](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/23/opinion/trump-birthright-citizenship-mccarthy.html). They are doing this by restricting who is deemed eligible to apply for change of legal status—rejecting those who belong to certain countries, or those who had previously made claims on the public funds, or those who have previous records. Much of this, under current law, would not deter anyone from gaining citizenship or legal status. However, the current administration wants to, in effect, create newer classes of sub-citizens who would be at continuous risk of being deemed/declared “illegal.” This remains the most forward-looking part of citizenship throttling, but we simply did not have the data to visualize it.

We failed to do any of three proposed visualizations for future predictive visualizations. Yet, all of this data, lead us to the same conclusion: the infrastructure of detainment, denaturalization, deportation is massive and its targets are not just those attempting to get in, but those who have been here for decades and decades.

## The Media Barometer

Another phenomenon we wanted to investigate, but could not produce a visualization for, was the role of news media in all of this: who is talking about ICE operations? where? how often? and in what contexts? Even more importantly, what is not being talked about? Using news APIs and RSS feeds we tried to explore these questions through local media sources. We were able to successfully extract headlines and snippets of stories from RSS feeds and to scrape returned URLs from news APIs to retrieve full articles. Unfortunately, it proved difficult to directly compare how different county news sources wrote about their local detention centers. 

The number of news hits about each detention facility that we pulled from API searches correlated inversely with the length of the detention center's name, suggesting that longer names were being abbreviated in some way and thus eluding our searches. More general searches using key terms associated with ICE operations did not suffer from this specific limitation, but proved to be hampered by limitations of the APIs with which we experimented and the unreliability of the data they returned. These APIs returned responses that included articles from dates outside our search parameters, did not include recent news from many news sources that the APIs claimed to index, and only included a small percent of the total articles from others. Furthermore, API responses for different counties were unrepresentative of the relevant media sources, while, all free APIs we used limited the number of calls we could make per day, which made it too difficult to finesse our searches in a timely manner. Ultimately we did not want to risk misrepresenting the media landscape.

During these efforts, however, we were able to draw some general characterizations about the mediascape. For one, we can confirm that news stories about ICE operations and detention centers are numerous enough that they would reward an approach to their analysis that can address the difficulties we ran into. Our API searches returned more than 2,200 stories mentioning detention centres by name and containing relevant keywords just in the last month, and our subsequent benchmarking of the API responses suggests that this only represents a small percentage of the total stories written during this time. It is also clear that even small local news sources frequently have some news content about ICE detention. And finally, initial analysis suggests there are differences in how different regions' news sources write about the key terms, even though we were not sufficiently satisfied with the representativeness of our data to go into more detail at this stage. 

## Passing on the baton

After Vol. 1, we imagined passing on the model of Torn Apart/Separados to new teams. The [design and prototype sprints](https://www.hastac.org/blogs/danicasavonick/2018/07/08/torn-apartseparados-hackathon-hastac-meet-recap) we held at the DH2018 conference in Mexico City were part of our efforts to share our rapid approach and ethos with our community. Vol. 2 took longer to produce—though still at light speed in academic years. Life continued, we had a larger team, we had more complex data sets, and we had to tend to other commitments. In both cases, however, model workflows can be abstracted, and we will make that available through the [Nimble Tents Toolkit](https://nimbletents.github.io) in the near future for others who would like to replicate our model with other subject matter, or who would like to take on the mantle of rapidly-deployed ICE research. For those who would take on the latter, we did our best in here to list some of our remaining open questions, but there are many more. For example, we know that data from "sanctuary" cities leaks to ICE through [CopLink](https://theappeal.org/new-documents-reveal-how-ice-mines-local-police-databases-across-the-country-660e2dfddbe3/) and what are known as [Fusion Centers](https://www.aclu.org/other/more-about-fusion-centers). How would a macroscopic view of these data flows look like? Will you be the one to answer?

We are happy to [pass on our data](https://github.com/xpmethod/torn-apart-open-data) and lessons learned to the teams that take on these challenges. Just drop us a line at tornapartseparados@gmail.com if you have any questions.

---

[^1]: Donald Trump. [Aug 22, 2018.  Tweet](https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1032299750362689536).

