## Our Research

*Torn Apart* aggregates and cross-references publicly available data to visualize the geography of Donald Trump’s “zero tolerance” immigration policy in 2018 and immigration incarceration in the USA in general. We also draw attention to the landscapes, families, and communities riven by the massive web of immigrant detention in the United States.

Working nimbly and remotely from four sites in the United States over a six-day period, our small team of researchers set about identifying sources of data on immigrant detention, from ports of entry run by Customs and Border Protection (CBP), to Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention centers, to shelters subcontracted by the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) to care for children in their custody, to the financial trails left by a network of public, private, and non-profit organizations complicit with the complex infrastructure of immigrant detention in the United States. 

Our sources for obtaining [the data](/torn-apart/credits.html) were varied. Those we worked from included a FOIA-ed list of ICE facilities, publicly available lists of CBP sites, data sets of ICE detainee hearings, state childcare licensing databases, government grant awards lists, and [USASpending.gov](https://www.usaspending.gov/#/search). We cross-checked our data through non-governmental sources as well: news reports about immigrant detention, business databases, tax documents for non-profit organizations, job advertisements, Google Maps entries, Facebook Places, and more. All of our data has been verified through a minimum of [two sources](/torn-apart/bibliography.html), at least one directly from the government.

What our data reveals is a shadowy network of government facilities, subcontractors from the prison-industrial complex, “non-profit” administrators paid over half a million dollars a year, and religious organizations across the country that, together, prop up the immigrant detention machine. Immigrant detention is a multi-billion dollar business and it’s happening in our own backyards. The crisis for immigrants in the United States is not only happening at the Mexico-United States border or other ports of entry. Rather, the border is everywhere. 

This is not to say that *Torn Apart*, now in alpha release, paints a complete picture of immigrant detention. Like all maps, ours is a representation of data, reflecting choices we made while designing visualizations. For example, a simple decision to place data points in the foreground rather than in the background offers a very different reading of the locations of ICE detention centers, as the map below demonstrates.

#IMGTAG#

Our desire to ensure accuracy also led to the decision not to include public data
we could not verify with confidence. For example, numbers of beds in ORR
shelters, which can be found through government and state sources, might seem
to offer a picture of the numbers of children in ORR custody, but our research
revealed that some of those organizations also work with Child Protective
Services. As a result, it’s unclear exactly what percentage of children in
their shelters are, in fact, in the ORR system. At a moment when there is
significant confusion about the exact whereabouts of migrant children who have
been separated from their parents, we did not want to add an additional layer
of confusion by suggesting that children might be in places they are not.   

We also had some difficult political and ethical choices to make when choosing
the data that should not be easily available to the public, and we revisited
our decisions daily. Revealing the addresses of these facilities, particularly
the ORR children’s shelters, was a matter of great concern. While we were
using publicly available data, aggregating it in a single place seemed a
potentially dangerous choice, offering a road map to an already vulnerable
population or preempting careful organization by activists. Although we have a
reliable data set of names of children’s shelters, we did not include the
names because quick Google searches lead to street addresses. By mapping
detention facilities at the city and state level, however, we circumvented the
immediate dangers while still achieving our goal of accurately depicting the
vast geographical sweep of immigrant detention in the United States. 

As we cross-referenced our findings among these sources, we found ourselves
down rabbit holes revealing the more human and heartbreaking dimensions of
immigrant detention. Below are some samples that provide a bit of texture to
our visualizations.

## Googling “Where Are the children?”

We can find almost anything on Google these days, so perhaps it’s no surprise
desperate parents are using it to [find their detained
children](https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/435mqd/how-charities-are-trying-to-reunite-separated-immigrant-families).
While researching shelters subcontracted by ORR, we came across this curious
use of Google business listings. On the listing below for a shelter run by
[Southwest Key](http://www.swkey.org), a Latinx-run “non-profit” that has
[received nearly one billion dollars](https://www.usaspending.gov/#/search/281d94b393e15b6a0caf31afd04d1261) in
government contracts and grants over the last four years, a horrifying note
from a parent pleads, “I need information about my daughter.” [Let me Google
that for you](http://lmgtfy.com/?q=where+is+my+detained+child%3F) has never
been so tragic.

#IMGTAG#

## Rate My Detention Center

Facebook has been [rightly chastised this
year](https://www.amazon.com/Antisocial-Media-Disconnects-Undermines-Democracy/dp/0190841168)
for the way their mediascape has undermined democracy and careful
deliberation. Along with the bi-partite siloes of the current moment, many of
its lesser known corners are haunted with the everyday textures of our
American fright night. During our research, we visited some of the pages that
Facebook seems to generate automatically from other directories of known
places—at the very least, they are marked as “unofficial.” On those pages we
found pleas similar to the ones we found in Google searches, but we also found
selfies of families in cars checking in at facilities to visit loved ones,
comments full of heart emojis and well wishes from friends, the disembodied
voice of a child offering a glowing review of his stay at an ORR shelter, and
much more. Because of Facebook’s web
architecture, we were struck by the way that families were using their review
system for their own purposes, reinforcing for us [the hope of technological
disobedience](http://www.technologicaldisobedience.com/). 

After Alex Gil [tweeted a
screenshot](https://twitter.com/elotroalex/status/1008896200869908481) of one
of these pages, Rachelle Hampton at *Slate* took on the specific challenge of
investigating them. The result was her story, “[Family Members of Detainees
Are Reviewing Border Detention Centers on
Facebook](https://slate.com/human-interest/2018/06/detainees-family-members-are-reviewing-border-detention-centers-on-facebook-and-google.html).”
Now, members of the public are filling these pages with demands for
[accountability and
transparency](https://www.facebook.com/pages/Southwest-Key-Programs/463839093693174). 

#IMGTAG#

## The Banality of Annual Reports

In “[Registering the Handicapped in Nazi Germany: A Case
Study](/torn-apart/assets/docs/friedlander-registering.pdf),” Henry
Friedlander reminds us that infrastructures building on one another, fueled by
racist ideology and operating in relative shadows, can lead to a final
infrastructure. Part of the fuel for our own project is keeping the spotlight
fixed on the massive infestation of immigration detention centers in the
United States today, while iterating the [long history of tearing families
apart](https://me.me/i/martha-s-jones-marthasjones-forcibly-separating-parents-from-children-has-22176180)
to feed the national fevers of the United States. Though these companies were
relatively obscure until very recently, the way they are run is all too
familiar. Part of our research brought us to company sites and business
databases behind paywalls. What we found was the usual paraphernalia of
management culture, including their annual reports. Below you can see how
United States management culture, in its compulsion for spin, betrays the
racist nature of “service.”  

#IMGTAG#

Facing public backlash, some of these companies [began to
whitewash their
operations](http://www.mtctrains.com/mtcs-involvement-in-operating-ice-detention-centers/).
Others began the all too familiar process of deleting their records. Below is
the 404 page that sits now where the above GIF came from.

#IMGTAG#


## The Detention Gold Rush

Immigrant detention is not just big business, it is also “job creation.” While
just a year ago non-profit organizations housing children in ORR custody
engaged in [massive
layoffs](http://valleycentral.com/news/local/southwest-key-program-conducts-mass-layoffs-due-to-recent-decline-in-immigration),
the “zero tolerance” immigration policy has led to a hiring spree. A barely
over minimum wage hiring spree, but [only the
best](https://www.texasmonthly.com/news/southwest-key-hired-child-case-manager-previously-arrested-child-pornography/)
for migrant children. After all, they sometimes even want an employee who’s
bilingual. Then again, not all brown immigrants [speak
Spanish](https://twitter.com/minh81/status/1009892301433458688). 

#IMGTAG#

## What’s Next?

As our experiences show, wading into the waters of public information on
immigrant detention is a decision that shouldn’t be undertaken lightly. First
and foremost, it must be done with the safety of migrants and asylum-seekers
in mind. Researchers must also be aware that this work can be taxing on the
spirit. Exposure to this level of cruelty is probably best handled by those
who feel prepared to fix their eyes on intimate horrors and still fight on
with clarity of mind and a stout will. We urge you take care of yourself at
the same time as you care for others—through the work.

What we have demonstrated here, we hope, is that a small team of researchers
with varied skill sets—librarians, graduate students, literary scholars, and
historians—and experience with digital humanities can pool their expertise to
respond quickly, yet carefully, in times of crisis. Reflections on this
project will form part of a forthcoming “[Nimble
Tents](https://nimbletents.github.io/)” toolkit, to be hosted by the [Digital Library Federation](https://diglib.org/), detailing lessons learned from similar rapid-response projects. 

While *Torn Apart* is one iteration of our work, we are gladly sharing our data, using various curated mechanisms, to other teams that wish to use it in new ways.

## Works Cited

Friedlander, H. “Registering the Handicapped in Nazi Germany: A Case Study,” *Jew History* (1997) 11: 89. DOI: [https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02335679](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02335679)
